# 2018/01/01 - a work in progress

A fight a lot a painful thought when I am publishing something on the
Internet: Am I toxic? I sure this won't stop today, nor tomorrow.

I have dozens of repositories online, I feel somewhat shameful about
it because most of them don't work anymore. I have the feeling that it
gives a bad impression. That said, my belief that those will be useful
for me and for other people is stronger.

I repeat myself that a) I do the right thing by sharing my
*experience* b) It's good to talk about it.  This is in this spirit
that I blog, share code and do other things of life.

I have the right to write a software trying to understand how opencog
works and call it culturIA. Thinking in terms of words Intelligence
Augmentation instead of Artificial Intelligence. Using that very same
name for a versioned hypergraph, and then mixing it with my
grandiloquent blog engine (read a blog that is not static html) that I
call a personal knowledge base. Forget about Natural Language
Processing because it's too difficult or too soon or because I am not
skilled enough. And go back to it. I should feel free to say
*cyberspace transderivational search* without feeling ashamed. I
should feel free to reinvent the wheel (on my free time (at
least)). To create a search engine and fail and try again later. To
think that I can do better than others. I should feel free to be a
creative mind.

I have the right to dream big.

I should feel free to do all those things that are not toxic, but I
don't feel that way.

There should be a place for everyone, I hope one day I will be
confortable at mine.
